JOSS submission (#70)
Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci: paper/paper.md

Reviewer: This paper is great, short and sweet. Thanks @joewallwork for working on this and keeping up with it. I'm excited to what the future holds for this package!

---
title: "Green software engineering practices for GitHub Actions continuous integration workflows"
tags:
  - continuous integration
  - continuous development
  - green software
  - jinja
authors:
  - name: Joseph G. Wallwork
    affiliation: "1"
    orcid: 0000-0002-3646-091X
    corresponding: true
  - name: Don Setiawan

>     affiliation: "2"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: Landung Setiawan
    affiliation: "2"
    orcid: 0000-0002-1624-2667
```

>   - name: Marion B. Weinzierl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - name: Marion Weinzierl
```

conditions such that all code changes give rise to the appropriate responses.

The `green-ci` package documents best practices for Green CI/CD such as how to
configure timeouts, concurrency, and triggers. Examples are given for the case
of workflows set up using the popular GitHub Actions framework. The package also
provides a templating approach for setting up new GitHub Actions workflows that
follow Green CI/CD best practices.

# Statement of need

It is now well understood that tackling the climate crisis requires reducing
CO$_2$ emissions across all sectors, including software development. As
motivated above, CI/CD forms a key part of software development workflows and
should also be targeted.

Several green computing tools that are relevant to CI/CD, although these are
mostly focused on measurement. CodeCarbon [@CodeCarbon] is a Python package,
which estimates the carbon footprint of a computation based on the energy used
to run it and carbon intensity data for the region in which it is being
performed. EcoCI [@EcoCI] applies the same methodology to CI/CD workflows so
that users can estimate the carbon footprint of their CI/CD tasks.

> There is a wealth of guidance on green practices for CI/CD, including general

Reviewer 2: Not sure whether we can call it "a wealth". :D Maybe "some existing"?

Reviewer: I agree, there are some here..

Author: Fixed by @lsetiawan in https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci/pull/70/commits/4c75882b5cc6bb31ec42b02dfc739713f63d6a31.

> There is a wealth of guidance on green practices for CI/CD, including general

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is some existing guidance on green practices for CI/CD, including general
```

framework specifically [@Saavedra2025;@Laskar2025]. However, to the best of the
authors' knowledge, no tool currently exists which provides easily adoptable
workflow templates following such practices.

# Software description

The `green-ci` package was born out of a hackathon at the Virtual Institute for
Scientific Software Convening in Cambridge in September 2025. In the hackathon,
we established the statement of need above and set out to create a package which
meets this need. The package contains two main components: best practices
documentation and templates for green GitHub Actions workflows.

## Best practices documentation

The best practices documentation builds on the work of
[@Claßen2023;@Alvarez2024;@Saavedra2025;@Laskar2025], as well as best practices
established within our teams and by the Green Research Software Engineering
Special Interest Group (Green RSE SIG). This long-form documentation can be
found on the [`green-ci` webpage](https://cambridge-iccs.github.io/green-ci/).

## Templating

The templating approach is based on `copier` [@Copier]. The `green-ci`
repository includes several GitHub actions workflow templates making use of

> Jinja syntax. These provide various options for the user to specify, such as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jinja templating engine. These provide various options for the user to specify, such as the
```

file extensions for source code, documentation, and build system files, timeouts
for different tasks, and additional options such as whether to enable carbon
footprint estimation with EcoCI.

> Templates for test suites and static analysis workflows included, so users can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Templates for test suites and static analysis workflows are included, so users can
```
